Welcome back everyone.
In this lecture we're going to discuss how to work with missing data real world data sets often have
missing data.
Realistically speaking there are really only three ways to deal missing data.
The first is to just leave it as missing.
Second is to remove the missing data.
And third is to fill in the missing data.
Let's briefly discuss each of these strategies.
The first strategy is to just leave in the missing data as missing and depending on the type of data
this is often a valid choice.
For example if you're dealing of categorical data such as the colors of houses and for some reason you
have some missing values there.
If there's not that many missing values you could simply just treat in the not a number or missing data
as another category you could use your piano skills to later on replace it as a string maybe saying
not a color or not present for categorical data.
That's a perfectly valid choice.
Again it really depends on the situation.
The second option is to remove the missing data whether or not this is a valid choice really depends
on the situation.
The overall goal and also it strongly depends on how much data is missing.
Let's think of it in the context of a feature column in our dataset.
If we're missing a large percentage of this column for example let's imagine that we're missing Ninety
five percent of all the values for this particular feature column then we're missing too much to actually
make a reasonable guess as to what those values should be.
So we should probably just drop that column to begin with.
However let's imagine we're dealing with a small percentage.
So again thinking of that feature column if we're only missing a few points off of that then it probably
makes sense to just remove those rows that correspond to those missing points on a particular column.
So again if you have a large percentage missing from a feature column go ahead and just remove that
column.
There's not enough useful information there.
If you're only missing a few or a small percentage of values there.
Go ahead and drop those corresponding rows.
You're probably not gonna lose that if that much information from those extra data points finally.
And this is usually the hardest to figure out is filling in the missing data.
So this is where you have a non-trivial percentage is missing and also maybe the data point rows are
really important or you'll have enough data to comfortably just drop data points.
There's lots of strategies available here.
Often people fill in missing data with things like the mode the mean or the median or the base it off
in other feature column and conceive of a reason about value.
Keep in mind there is absolutely no correct answer as to what the approach should be to fill in missing
data because at the end of the day you're just making an educated estimate or guess as to what that
missing data should be.
Because by definition you are to some degree making it up maybe you're making it up based off a very
sophisticated and smart model but you are still conceiving of something that wasn't actually there.
So filling the filling in missing data is the hardest one to do but it's often the one that allows you
to keep all your data which is also a nice tradeoff.
Now a really common student question I get is what is the correct approach to actually dealing of missing
data.
And unfortunately the best I can say is all data sets in situations are completely different.
So there's not a general consensus answer I can give here.
We should do is use your common sense and more importantly think of the overall goals that you're trying
to achieve when you're dealing with this dataset and machine learning in general to see which strategy
makes sense.
If you have millions of rows then it's probably not a big deal to actually just remove some of those
rows in order to get rid of that missing data.
If you have a really small dataset you're probably going to want to try to figure out how to fill in
those missing values or how to be smart about it in order to leave the missing values in.
Okay let's go ahead and see what options pan this gives us for each of these strategies.
I'm going to head over to Jupiter notebook here I am of the Jupiter notebook.
I've gone ahead and imported umpires and peat empanadas as Piti.
Then I opened up our missing data notebook and I copy and paste of the contents of one of the very first
cells here in order to create a data frame that already has some built in missing values so here.
If I actually call the data frame and again you can copy and paste this code from the notebooks you
provide.
I can see I have three columns columns A B and C and the important thing to note here is that only one
of these columns Column C still retains all its values 10 20 30 and 40 and rows 0 in rows 3 have all
their values 1 5 and 10 and then 4 8 and 40 the rest of them we can see here have some sort of amount
of missing data points.
Now let's recall our three strategies again strategy number one is to simply just leave the missing
data.
So in that case we're pretty much already done so we'll move on to Strategy 2 which is removing the
missing data now there's various parameters we can use for this.
The main method call is DFT drop and a and we can see here that if we do shift tab the documentation
docs string has axes how and threshold as the main parameters.
It also has a subset so you can see here with the different parameters stand for axes determines whether
you're dropping this based off the index or columns.
How determines if you're going to do it.
If any values are missing or if all values are missing then there's also a threshold which requires
that many not any values.
And then there's also a subset labels to consider along an axis.
So if you're dropping rose these would be the list of columns to include.
Now typically we're gonna do is drop based off columns but if we just run DFT drop N A.
By default the axis is zero.
So it's gonna be looking at rows so it's only to return back Lea rows where nothing is missing.
If I say X is equal to 1 that is just going to return back the column where nothing is missing.
I can also specify a threshold so I could do something like say Thresh is equal to two which actually
brings back everything so we're call that threshold means.
It requires that many non null values so must have at least two non null values and all of these columns
actually have that column B has at least two non null values.
But let's imagine our threshold was three.
In that case column B no longer applies to only had two non Nono values and often what people do is
they base this threshold off some sort of percentage.
So maybe we can see here we want at least 25 percent of the values to be non null or something similar
to that.
We could just calculate that based off the length of the data frame and then maybe we say something
like zero point to five or something of that nature OK so we can see here that we were able to drop
based off the roads or the columns and also set off thresholds as well to say things like how like any
or all the third strategy we discussed was actually fill in the missing data to do that.
We can say the F dot fill and a and this is actually very flexible.
Again it has parameters such as values methods axes in place et cetera.
But the main way we can see it here is by saying value is equal to.
And then just passing in full value before I run this I want to show what the original data frame looked
like.
So recall our original data frame here has these three missing values recall also that technically the
data types if we were to look at them here are floats and integers.
However I'm passing in a string as my full value so it's kind of interesting as pandas doesn't complain.
It just says OK if that's what you want that's what you can get.
And it went ahead and filled in those values.
So we can do this with essentially anything we want.
We can say the f fill value and say go ahead and make any missing points equal to zero.
And then we have zeros and it's got to try its best to make sure that if you just set an integer zero
here.
But these were floating points it converts it to floating points.
Similarly it converted five and eight here to strings in order for these fill values to actually match.
OK so the other thing to note here is I don't have to do this across the entire data frame if I want
I can do this based off columns themselves so I can say the F of a go ahead and fill in any missing
values there as zero and then I get this back.
So I could technically then do some sort of reassignment such as DCF of a is equal to DFA they fill
in and that now has actually permanently affected my data frame so that that missing value has now been
filled in 0 0.
However let's imagine I want to do something maybe a little more clever.
So I wanted to fill in.
For example the missing values and be with the average value across be what I could do is a DSP.
Go ahead and grab the mean there.
No it's six point five.
So it's essentially halfway between five and eight.
So we're gonna to do then is say OK take DSP and then fill in a or the value to fill is equal to the
FBI.
That mean and this is also a really common strategy.
And I could technically do this across an entire data frame by saying the F fill in a with D F mean.
And notice here it fills it in with six point fives as well.
Okay.
And it would do that for any column that happens to be missing information.
So if I were to essentially rerun this to get back that a missing value here and I said def filename
with the s mean run that we can see here it fills in in the mean of 1 2 and 4 which are up to speed
two point thirty three for that column then for column B does it with six point five.
So does that on a per column basis which is quite nice.
All right.
So that's it for the three strategies of dealing of missing data with pandas.
Thanks.
And I'll see you at the next lecture.